	INTRODUCTION TO C LANGUAGE

C is a general-purpose high level language that was originally developed by Dennis Ritchie for the Unix operating system. 
It was first implemented on the Digital Eqquipment Corporation PDP-11 computer in 1972.

The Unix operating system and virtually all Unix applications are written in the C language. C has now become a widely used professional language for various reasons.

Easy to learn

Structured language

It produces efficient programs.

It can handle low-level activities.

It can be compiled on a variety of computers.

Facts about C

C was invented to write an operating system called UNIX.

C is a successor of B language which was introduced around 1970

The language was formalized in 1988 by the American National Standard Institue (ANSI).

By 1973 UNIX OS almost totally written in C.

Today C is the most widely used System Programming Language.

Most of the state of the art software have been implemented using C

Why to use C ?

C was initially used for system development work, in particular the programs that make-up the operating system.
 C was adoped as a system development language because it produces code that
 runs nearly as fast as code written in assembly language. Some examples of the use of C might be:

Operating Systems
Language Compilers
Assemblers
Text Editors
Print Spoolers
Network Drivers
Modern Programs
Data Bases
Language Interpreters
Utilities
C Program File

All the C programs are writen into text files with extension ".c" for example hello.c. You can use "vi" editor to write your C program into a file.

This tutorial assumes that you know how to edit a text file and how to write programming insturctions inside a program file.

C Compilers

When you write any program in C language then to run that program you need to compile that program using a C Compiler 
which converts your program into a language understandable by a computer. This is called machine language (ie. binary format)
. So before proceeding, make sure you have C Compiler available at your computer. It comes alongwith all flavors of Unix and Linux.

Structure of a C program
-include Header files
-global decleration
-function main
-decleration part
-executable part
-user-defined function
-body of the function
-comments
